[AUDIO LOGO]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The land of Wasit lies in the
center of Egypt and contains 85%
of its monuments.
Among them are Karnak and
Luxor as well as Djemet,
where eight of the
original gods are buried.
Many more remain hidden
under sand or silt,
awaiting their turn
to be resurrected.
It's a similar situation as
far as people are concerned.
Much of their potential lies
dormant until something awakens
within that transforms
them into the man
or woman they were born to be.
Like most esoteric
cultures, Egyptians
regarded the
incarnation of the soul
into the body as
a spiritual death.
And they went to great lengths
to remedy the situation.
[THEME MUSIC]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The land to the West of the
Nile marks the sun's descent
into the underworld.
Above this arid landscape rises
the pyramid-shaped mountain
Dehenet, abode of the
goddess Meretseger,
she who loves silence.
And in two valleys below,
many kings and queens
found this epitaph to be true
when they were laid to rest.
Unlike pyramids, the valleys
of the kings and queens
are the places to
find buried royalty.
The tombs are richly decorated
with their owner's life
achievements, associations
with protective gods,
and details of their
journey into the Amduat,
the Egyptian otherworld.
But at the extreme end of
the Valley of the Kings,
one tomb deviates from the rest.
Sat in a narrow crevasse 80
feet above the desert floor,
the alleged resting
place of Tutmosis III
was found sealed along
with its sarcophagus.
When it was opened, there was
nobody inside nor would there
have been because
Tutmosis was buried
on the other side of the
mountain in the mortuary temple
beside that of his
stepmother, Hatshepsut.
So what on Earth
is going on here?
To the Egyptians, a
tomb was a place of rest
but not necessarily a
final resting place.
In much the same manner,
experiencing the Amduat
did not require a
person to be dead.
On the contrary, evidence
shows that after undergoing
an initiation ritual inside
the restricted chamber,
candidates were roused
several days later
from a wound-like experience
and proclaimed awoken or arisen.
Tutmosis' monument is
different in every sense.
It features a well, a redundant
feature for a dead person.
The first chamber forms
the bridge into the Amduat.
Despite Tutmosis' extraordinary
accomplishments, none of them
are listed.
Instead, the room displays the
book of the hidden chamber,
a complete set of 741
protective deities,
spells, and incantations
necessary for the initiate
to access the Amduat
and maintain focus
to ensure his return.
The Amduat was as real to
Egyptians as the physical world.
But unlike the physical
world, this parallel place
exists outside of time.
It is present and eternal and
simultaneous with the physical.
It interpenetrates the
world of the living, a place
from where all
physical forms manifest
and to where they return.
It is an integral component
of birth, death, and rebirth.
The book claims that only
through a direct experience
of the Amduat can one fully
grasp the operative forces
of nature, the
knowledge of which
is said to transform a person
into an akh, a being radiant
with inner spiritual
illumination.
Because the physical
body operates
at a very dense
vibration, the process
also involves techniques
to guide more penetrating
frequencies, slowly raising
the body's vibration
and preparing it for the
ultimate out-of-body experience
from which the individual was
expected to return and live
a fully active life.
And Tutmosis III
did exactly that.
The lower chamber is also shaped
unlike a regular burial chamber.
It is in the elongated
shape of a cartouche,
symbolizing eternity.
The sarcophagus is a
scaled version of the room.
And whereas the west is
the ritual orientation
for the dead, this room
is aligned northeast,
symbolic of the quest
for knowledge and wisdom.
Whoever lay here did not
come looking for death.
They came in search
of illumination.
The book of the hidden
chamber rolls out
like a papyrus around the room.
Although painted in a simplistic
and uncharacteristic style
for a ruler of
this magnitude, it
is expertly executed, providing
a highly descriptive account
of the journey of the
initiate aboard a solar boat
across the Milky Way, the
obstacles and challenges facing
the soul as it navigates
the unusual landscape,
and the assistance it would
receive to reach its intended
destination.
However, the text claims
the experience is not
intended for a dead person
but one who is alive.
It is good for the dead
to have this knowledge
but also for the
person on Earth.
Whoever understands
these mysterious images
is a well provided light being.
Always, this person can
enter and leave the Amduat,
always speaking to
the living ones proven
to be true a million times.
Clearly, Tutmosis
and perhaps others
used a chamber to
access the shadow world
and return with specialized
information, which
was then practically
applied in daily life.
And yet, the ritual was not
limited to people of high rank.
One account of a
spirit door belonging
to a servant in the
household of Pharaoh Teti
I describes how he
was favored to join
a privileged inner
circle via secret ritual
to master the secret
things of the pharaoh.
The humble man states, today in
the presence of Teti, son of Ra,
more honored by the pharaoh
than any servant, master
of secret things.
When his majesty
favored me, he caused
that I enter the chamber
of restricted access.
And upon returning
from his experience,
the grateful servant joyfully
proclaims, I found the way.
But the big question
is, If this ritual
had been performed
a million times,
just how far back
does the tradition go?
Was this another of the
pieces of temple protocol
introduced by the Aku Shemsu
Hor, the shining ones,
followers of Horus?
Illumination may have
inspired the creation
of a sprawling complex on
the east side of the Nile
by the name of Karnak.
Karnak expanded like a
living entity from a seed
into a rambling metropolis,
where anybody who was anyone
left a shrine, a pillar, an
obelisk, even an entire temple.
Karnak is creation in a
permanent state of creation.
The name translates as stone
sanctuary of the illuminated
being.
50 feet of silt and
accumulated rubble
beneath the present buildings
make it impossible to date.
However, its only surviving
megalithic structure,
ostensibly the oldest, is a
sun shrine along the main axis,
which would have aligned to the
winter solstice and the minor
lunar standstill
around 4,400 BC,
just as the age of Taurus
was reaching its climax.
The simple yet robust shrine
appears to have been rededicated
and reused 3,000 years later
by our old friend Tutmosis III.
But the founding of Karnak may
lie deeper still in antiquity.
Its most ruined section
falls under the protection
of the original
prehistoric god Montu,
ostensibly making it the oldest.
Montu is the universe defined,
the creative principle
manifested as time and space.
Such a fundamental
understanding of how
life evolves would have been
a staple teaching of the Aku
Shemsu Hor.
Coincidentally, the general
alignment of Montu's precinct
is similar to that between
the Temple of Edfu and Orion.
The movement from one age to
the next brings new ideals.
The old causeway into Karnak is
lined with an Avenue of Rams,
marking the passage
into the age of Aries.
Around this time,
Montu's position
was superseded by
three gods, defining
the eternal cycle of creation--
Amun, his consort Mut, and
their divine child Khonsu.
A shrine of dedication
to this trinity
marks the entrance, illustrating
how the cult of Amun
not only dominated
this epoch, it even
led to the rewriting
of earlier narratives.
For example, near the destroyed
chapel of Tutankhamun,
a pillar celebrating
the coronation of Seti
I shows the pharaoh
honoring Amun on the right,
except Amun's image is
set deeper into the stone.
The pillar has been recarved.
Tutankhamun himself did
not escape the purge.
He was forced to change his
original name, Tutankhaten.
Never one to be
outshone, Rameses II
enlarged the great
court to make way
for two rows of
statues of himself,
of which only three remain.
At least he was thoughtful
enough to add an effigy
of his wife, even
if a small one.
A vast field of debris
surrounds Karnak.
It is an invitation to study
the art of the stonemason.
The fine detail on a basket
or the skin of a serpent
can be appreciated now they're
no longer on a lintel 30 feet
above the ground.
Here, we find
pharaohs being granted
everlasting life and kings
honored by the divine bride.
One building stands
out among the rubble.
the small chapel of Senusret
I looks harmonious and perfect
from every angle.
And no wonder.
The proportions of
this delicate gem
are based on the harmonics
of the Earth, moon, and sky.
Two platforms incorporate
the sacred and royal cubit,
the most accurate
units of measure
derived from the
measurement of the Earth.
It was still so until NASA
superseded them using data
from a satellite.
Doors and windows are based on
the mathematical proportions
of musical notes, such as the
octave and the perfect fifth,
as well as the golden
ratio, nature's very
own mathematical progression.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The chapel is essentially a
guidebook of geodetic and sonic
information.
Earthquakes, warfare,
and general pillaging
reduced the courtyard, once
bristling with obelisks, to two.
Hatshepsut's is not just
the tallest ever erected.
It is also carved with
industrial precision
from a single block
of red granite, one
of the hardest rocks on Earth.
3,500 years later, it is
still in perfect condition.
The transportation of
such massive needles
once taxed the extremes
of Victorian engineering.
Yet Egyptians moved them
seemingly without effort,
150 miles upriver from Aswan.
No obelisk is the same.
Each has its own angle.
And when placed in pairs,
the height difference
turned them into sundials
by measuring the difference
in the shadow cast by the sun.
By virtue of their
geometry, length, and pitch,
they make perfect resonators.
One fallen obelisk
still hums when struck.
Like tuning forks, they set
the tone at the entrance
to a temple, acting as
a kind of force field,
especially when placed above
the flow of the Earth's
electromagnetic currents.
This energy was stored by
the quartz in the stone,
generating a piezoelectric
effect that rose to the tip,
which was stamped with
a sheet of electrum,
a highly conductive metal made
from a recipe of 2/3 pure gold
to one third pure silver.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
At the core of Karnak
is the Sacred Lake,
representing the
primordial ocean.
The proportions conform
to the golden ratio.
Just as crocodiles once
resided at Kom Ombo,
so Karnak was home
to hippopotami,
the material form of the
goddess of fertility Taweret.
The lake was used for
purification ceremonies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But by far the most
overwhelming feature in Karnak
is the Hypostyle Hall.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Of 134 massive columns,
neatly arranged in 16 rows,
122 feature closed
papyrus reeds.
They converge on a central
row of 12 taller columns
with open buds, symbolizing
the total unfolding.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The Hypostyle Hall is a graphic
depiction of vegetal life
emerging from the primal swamp.
It is the act of
creation, the unfolding
of the mechanics of life.
Like wandering through
a field of reeds,
the effect is bewitching.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As with the Osirion at Abydos,
the huge hall was once enclosed.
But whereas the
knowledge of the gods
was committed to memory
at Abydos, in Karnak,
it was carved upon each pillar,
linking the laws of creation
to the vault of the sky
and the domain of the gods.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Shafts of light from roof boxes
illuminated specific concepts
on philosophy and
natural science.
And since creation
was the result
of intended action expressed
through nature gods,
grand concepts were
interpolated by number.
Like an unfolding story,
bundles of columns associated
with specific creative
processes were laid out,
so as to be lit by sunlight at
allocated times of the year.
Or at least that was the idea
before pharaohs in later times
recarved the pillars
with their stories.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One teaching survived
the revisionism
during Karnak's long
and fluctuating history.
It is a scene of a pharaoh
sitting among an acacia tree
under guidance from
the god of wisdom.
The connection between
wisdom and the acacia
is the powerful
hallucinogen DMT produced
by the tree, which,
when consumed,
induces a shamanic state.
Under proper
guidance and ritual,
it allows a person to access
specialized information.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
But it took until the late 20th
century for science to discover
that the temple itself is
capable of generating a similar
effect.
Scientists at
Princeton University,
researching that fine line
between science and mysticism,
developed a device capable
of measuring the local energy
field with and without the
influence of human intent.
As one scientist walked in
respectful silence around Karnak
with a portable
version of the machine,
the energy emitted
from this sacred place
gave readings six times
stronger than those
compared to nonsacred locations,
the highest ever measured.
The experiment effectively
demonstrated the power of place.
However, the combination
of focused group prayer
in the temple created an
expanded consciousness field
that yielded even
higher results.
In other words,
such places generate
conditions that induce an
elevated state of awareness.
Add human consciousness,
and the field is amplified.
Clearly, we are an integral
part of this technology.
In a manner of
speaking, sacred places
are self-help centers,
illustrating a statement
repeated throughout the
ancient world, how temples
were built to transform a person
into a god, into a bright star.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> A processional avenue
of sphinx leads from Karnak
to Luxor.
Featuring the face
of Amenhotep III,
the pharaoh's bodhisattva smile
induces a hypnotic effect,
particularly after you
walk past 2,000 of them.
Luxor is an exercise
in harmony, designed
as it is under proportions
of nature and the human body,
hence why people feel
more attuned here.
It is a wonder, then, why,
over the past 2,000 years,
Luxor was allowed
to fall into decay.
Its connection to the Nile
was gradually severed.
And as a village sprouted within
and around it, entering the site
meant walking 50 feet
down a hill of dirt.
Much of the site was rebuilt by
Amenhotep III, his son Akhenaten
and his son Tutankhamun.
Yet by their time, Luxor was
at least 3,000 years old,
judging by the rubble used as a
foundation and the realignment
of the temple's axis, whose
original surveyors' marks are
etched into the pavement.
In this respect, early
Luxor and Karnak are linked.
As the winter solstice sun
shone into Karnak in 4400 BC,
Luxor looked out to
Vega, the bright star
in the constellation
of Lyra, the harp.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The axis of Luxor was
altered a third time
when another pharaoh
added his fingerprint
in the shape of a
front pylon adorned
with six colossal statues
of himself, Rameses II.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
And inside his
courtyard, too, why
have one statue when
you can have 28?
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The new courtyard protects an
earlier chapel of Amun, Mut,
and Khonsu, placed as it is on
the original axis, making it
the beginning of
the proper temple.
Two massive statues
of Amenhotep III,
cut from single
slabs of granite,
flanked the original entrance.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Amenhotep was a kind
of revolutionary.
He began to remove the power
of the centralized and corrupt
priesthood of Amun, a task
his son Akhenaten endeavored
to complete, albeit
unsuccessfully,
which would lead to a coup
and the murder of his son
Tutankhamun, whose statue
remains in Luxor to this day.
Amenhotep's second achievement
was the restoration
of many sacred buildings.
Behind his statue,
he tells us who
had his back on this project--
the elegant Seshat, goddess of
sacred buildings and measures
and her spouse, Djehuti, god of
wisdom, two original Akhu Shemsu
Hor, who, according to
the Edfu building texts,
were the only divine
beings who knew
how the temples and sacred
places were created,
for they were the very
creators of that knowledge.
The building texts also
refer to the temple
as an insurance policy.
"Whoever shall make a copy of
the vault of the sky and shall
copy it upon the earth, it
shall act as a magical protector
for them in heaven and on
earth unfailingly and regularly
and eternally."
Essentially, the laws of nature
were observed and hardwired
into the fabric of each building
to achieve a desired effect,
so much so that a temple
became the embodiment
of a force of nature, a
physical expression of a god.
You could say the Princeton
experiments validated this
at Karnak and Luxor, too.
But Luxor has another
surprise up its sleeve.
Seven vortices of energy
spring from the Earth
along the spine of the temple.
Their positions relative
to specific sections
that conform to the
human body implies
this was the pilgrimage
route intended
to stimulate the chakras
of a person walking
towards the altar.
The route upwells
from the ground
in between the two statues.
They lead to an elegant
colonnade originally set
within an enclosed hall.
One row of seven papyri
honors the Neta gods
responsible for creation, the
other, the seven sages who
brought the knowledge to Egypt.
The sacral and solar
plexus are activated here.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
To proceed along the
journey of transformation,
one must first open the heart.
In Luxor, the pilgrim emerges
into an expansive open court,
representing the unfolding
of the heart chakra.
This was a place
of great festivity
where women dressed in
white cotton dresses danced
to the sound of
lyres, a spectacle
made more poignant when the
constellation of the same name
appeared along the
axis of the temple.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A section of 32 columns remind
the visitor of the teachings
prior to advancing towards
the most sacred area.
Equivalent to the
choir in a cathedral,
the whole of eight
columns represent
the notes in the octave.
Here, a person
declared their intent
using their throat chakra.
Sadly, the Romans have left
nothing except faded frescoes.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
In the next hall,
frescoes of Tutankhamun
remind the king of
his divine origin.
The support offered by
the gods and the lineage
whose responsibility
is his to uphold.
In this hall of
four columns, one
for each of the four
elements, a person
reflected on their
state of mindfulness.
It is a room in which to
find balance before entering
the holy of holies.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Behind gold-lined cedar
doors, the visitor
experienced the activation
of the third eye.
This particular
sanctuary was rebuilt
by one individual
seeking illumination,
Alexander the Great.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The final stage of
the spiritual quest
was conducted in the
place of unfolding,
the whole of 12 columns,
which occupies the position
of the crown chakra.
Each column is composed
of eight reeds,
indicating the four material
and invisible elements
in perfect balance.
But Egyptians recognized an
eighth chakra, an energy field
extending beyond the
physical body that
separates the spiritualized
human from its ego.
And the last chamber
in Luxor was reserved
for this mystical practice.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The energy field of
the soul is reflected
in the impractical crown worn
symbolically by pharaohs.
However, it did have
one practical use.
It disguised a trait common to
the lineage of the Akhu Shemsu
Hor, their elongated skulls.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The light of dawn bathes
the compound of Netjeryt,
the house of the god.
An undulating perimeter of mud
brick defines the ocean of chaos
from the sacred precinct within.
Greeks of the first century
BC found this joyful temple
in a dilapidated
state and rebuilt it.
They left a note
inside the crypt,
declaring how the work
was performed according
to the plan written during the
times of the Akhu Shemsu Hor.
And it was then renamed Dendera.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Beneath the floor are reminders
of the previous temple.
Dendera is the house of
Hathor, the consort of Horus.
Depicted with the
ears of a cow, she
represents nature as a source
of perpetual nourishment,
so long as humans maintain
a proper relationship
with their environment.
To remind them, a
harvest festival
was conducted every year.
It began in the second hall with
a statue of the goddess emerging
dramatically out of the floor,
which led a procession up
a staircase to the
roof, from where flowers
were thrown to the crowd below.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The walls of Dendera are covered
in secret texts previously
committed to memory.
The priesthood foresaw the
rise of fundamentalist religion
and the end of the
mystery schools.
So in a desperate
act of preservation,
they posted the knowledge
on every available surface.
Paradoxically, it still
takes an expert to decipher.
Dendera also operated
as a healing temple,
drawing people from near and
far to learn and practice
magical and
psychological therapies.
The effigies in the first
hall are somewhat misleading.
They are, in fact,
Roman emperors
posing as divine beings, making
offerings to Egyptian deities.
As for the important information
in this impressive hall,
it pays to stare at the ceiling.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
A model of the
universe is presented.
It is filled with
calendrical details,
such as the phases of the moon,
the course of the sun, stars,
and constellations,
and the qualities
of the gods, their
responsibilities
and their association
with the cosmos.
Most importantly, it
lists the sacred times
essential for the
proper function
of the temple and the self.
In one telling scene,
the goddess of the sky
oversees the creation
of the zodiac.
A burst of light from her
vulva illuminates the age
of Cancer, the period
that roughly equates
with the reemergence
of the Akhu Shemsu Hor
and the rebuilding of
civilization after the Ice Age.
Ironically, Cancer
rules, agriculture,
animal domestication,
and housing, all of which
were in dire need of
attention following
a devastated landscape.
The point is emphasized
in the chapel of Osiris.
In this unique circular zodiac,
the round disk of the sky
is shown supported by
four goddesses marking
the solstices and the
four sets of hawk gods
marking the poles
and the equinox.
Together, the 12
figures form the months,
while the 24 hands mark
the hours of the day.
A ring of 36 figures marks the
heliacal risings of 36 stars,
one for each 10-degree segment
of the 360-degree zodiac,
whose houses are also depicted.
The planets and
72 constellations
expand in a spiral
whose focal point
is the crab, the age
of Cancer once again.
And although this
masterpiece may
have been carved in
historical times,
the original lies
in a remote age,
given that this map of the
cosmos is centered on a calf leg
depicting the Pleiades,
the seven stars
synonymous with
the seven sages who
formed the nucleus of
the Akhu Shemsu Hor.
But not everything in
this house of the goddess
is designed to make you look up.
There are also unusual
things taking place below.
Behind an incredibly
awkward and narrow entrance,
two crypts reveal the
ongoing preoccupation
with reaching the Amduat, a
process that, by the Greek era,
came to be known as incubation.
Inside these claustrophobic
womb-like chambers
initiates left the
body and returned.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The process is
outlined on the walls,
often presented as light
bulbs or advanced technology.
The mural actually depicts
the blue lotus, the drug
of choice in the ritual.
Connected to a Djed pillar,
the plant's inherent energy
rises from the bud in the
form of a serpent contained
within the halo or
soul of the plant.
The adjacent figures
continue the story.
The god of wisdom, in his
other form as a baboon,
cuts the cords of
intellect so the soul
can wander free in the Amduat.
The hero returns in
the form of Horus,
assisted by the energy
of the blue lotus,
now depicted in the
form of a solo boat
to ferry the initiate on this
journey across time and space.
At the completion, Seker,
the god of rebirth,
honors Hathor, whose temple
facilitated the experience back
to the cosmic egg.
Officially, these crypts are
designated as storage rooms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Egypt's original
capital is Men-nefer.
It means "established
in harmony."
It was once home to
the divine architect
Ptah and kings and queens who
lived in humble homes made
of mud brick.
Today, fragments
of its greatness
lie scattered among
fields of palm trees,
along with a humble
statue of Ramses II.
On the plateau
above, the god Seker
makes his biggest splash
in a 5 square mile complex
named after him, Saqqara.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The name may also derive
from [EGYPTIAN LANGUAGE],
to make perfect.
And 5,000 years of architecture,
along with tombs of Egyptian
nobles and Greek philosophers,
attest to generations who came
here seeking precisely that.
But Saqqara was not intended
solely as a funerary complex.
As we have discovered,
there is physical death
and metaphoric death.
Pyramids such as
those attributed
to Sekhemkhet and
Teti, which were
found sealed with nobody
inside, are examples of this.
And not forgetting the pyramid
of Unas, which illustrates
the lengths to which people went
to seek the Amduat while alive,
because Unas himself is buried
in the Valley of the Kings.
To reach this
pyramid, it required
crossing the Nile towards
the setting equinox sun,
disembarking at a
pier and walking along
a half-mile long
umbilical tunnel,
leading to a series of
subterranean preparatory rooms.
When finally
entering the pyramid,
you came face to face with
walls covered in the pyramid
texts, the earliest
sacred literature offering
a unique window into a
ritual connecting a living
person with the Amduat.
Like a veil
separating two worlds,
they are meticulously incised
into semitranslucent walls
of alabaster.
283 instructions offered
detailed descriptions
of the Amduat, how to get there,
how to overcome negative forces,
and the correct use of
spells essential for the soul
to maintain focus and
find its way back.
But above all, the pyramid
texts implied they were intended
for someone who was expected
to return to a living body,
as Unas himself declares, "I am
the one who went and came back
and shines anew in the east."
The text closest to the
sarcophagus reiterates this.
"Unas, you have
not departed dead.
You have departed alive to
sit upon the throne of Osiris,
your scepter in your hand
that you may give orders
to the living."
One section describes
Unas's eating habits,
which is very odd because a
dead or dying person doesn't
have an appetite.
"Unas eats their magic
and ingest their spirits.
Their big ones are
for his morning meal.
Their midsized ones are
for his evening meal.
Their little ones are
for his nightly meal."
The description refers to the
initiate gradually ingesting
a poison or powerful narcotic,
such as blue water lily,
prior to undertaking an
out-of-body excursion.
2,000 years later, Western
religion referred to this
as the Last Supper.
In another section,
Unas undergoes
a spiritual purification
and rebirth to the repeated
chorus of "Unas is not dead.
Unas is not dead," preceded
by the return to the pyramid.
No other passage so
encapsulates the central theme
common to this
esoteric tradition,
that the soul is capable
of temporarily disengaging
from the physical body,
journeying independently
into the spirit
world and returning.
But it is the massive stone
box that speaks volumes.
The deliberate choice
of basalt, a rock
that begins life in liquid form,
epitomizes the transmutation
between physical
and ethereal states.
While its black color,
[EGYPTIAN LANGUAGE] in Egyptian,
means to imagine,
to discover, sums up
the intent behind
Unas's journey,
one that would be
repeated a thousand
years later by Tuthmosis III.
To the modern eye, the colossal
effort behind this complex
seems over the top.
And yet practitioners
of this art
gained a profound
understanding of the universe
as it is rather
than how it appears.
Take Rekhmire, the vizier during
the reign of Tuthmosis III,
a man cognizant of the
mechanics of initiation,
one of whom it was claimed,
"There is nothing on Earth
in heaven or in any part of the
Amduat in which he does not have
knowledge."
And judging by the title he
was awarded, master of secrets
concerning the unique seeing
vision, the effort was worth it.
All this takes place just
beyond Saqqara's main compound,
which is secluded
from the mundane world
by a perimeter wall that
resembles a row of spirit doors.
One doesn't just casually
stroll into this sacred space.
One must first undergo
a purification.
Or as the pyramid text put it,
"Learn to master oneself before
entering the abode of the god."
And the preparatory
corridor into Saqqara
is designed exactly
for this purpose.
40 pillars formed by
bundles of 17 reeds,
each representing
the way of the gods,
marked the passage from
the known into the unknown.
The walk is all
about mindfulness.
Since the abode of the god
mimics a state of balance,
negative thoughts
and emotions must
be discarded
beforehand so as not
to pollute the delicate
environment within.
To achieve this, an alcove
separating each pillar
emits a positive or
negative current.
As these pass through
the body, a person
becomes conscious of imbalances
and disposes any excess baggage
they might be carrying.
Reaching the end
in a unified state,
the person passes through a
gateway in the shape of a T,
representing the
breath of god and is
ushered into the great court.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
One square mile of
buildings enclosed
within a perimeter in
the ratio of the octave
make this an imposing space.
During the 13th year
of the pharaoh's reign,
the court hosted the
Heb-Sed festival,
in which the pharaoh was
publicly disrobed down to a mere
white apron to
cover his modesty,
whereupon he ran
the perimeter twice.
And if successful, he was
declared reborn in heaven
and deemed too fit to
govern for another term.
That was the public
stage of the festival.
The ruler was then taken to
the restricted Heb-Sed Court
for a private ceremony.
Each shrine contains a
statue of a god representing
an aspect of the
mysteries, reminding
the pharaoh of the
teachings that were his duty
to exemplify and uphold.
Once the circuit
was completed, he
disappeared into a
restricted chamber
and reappeared three days
later to be declared living.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The focal point of Saqqara
is the imposing Step Pyramid.
Like an act of creation,
it grew in stages
from a small,
rectangular mastaba,
whose creator remains unknown.
The fifth and final
stage is attributed
to the architect Imhotep,
whose positive contributions
to society earned him
the status of god.
Officially, the pyramid
was designed as the burial
place of Pharaoh Djoser.
But since it incorporates four
buildings far older than Djoser,
this theory is a nonstarter.
Inside a deep shaft,
his alleged sarcophagus
contained no
hieroglyphs and no body.
The adjacent tunnels,
on the other hand,
were lined with thousands of
turquoise rectangles and packed
with 33,000 alabaster
jars and plates,
many preceding the
pharaoh's time.
One wonders why robbers
would steal a corpse
and leave their
valuables behind.
More stone boxes lie
throughout Saqqara,
and shafts sunk 120
feet into solid bedrock
and connected to a
warren of tunnels.
Largely unexplored,
this underground world
is highly suggestive
of people protecting
objects of great value.
Was Saqqara part of Djehuti's
elaborate engineering plan
to preserve the knowledge
of the Akhu Shemsu
Hor from destruction?
The answer may lie
nine miles away
when the tunnels
end in the place
where we began this adventure.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Ask anyone to share
their initial feelings
about each pyramid,
and they will give you
different responses, despite
the fact the buildings all
look the same.
But appearances
can be deceptive.
And indeed, there are
subtleties between each one.
The impressions fall
into distinct categories.
The small pyramid
has the intensity
of people engaged
in concentration
or mental activity.
The middle one feels
grounded and practical
and lacks the
spiritual element that
only seems to occur in
the Great Pyramid, the one
singularly associated
with shamanic experiences
and the supernatural.
It seems each
building was designed
to induce a different effect.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The pyramid
attributed to Menkaure
bears a large gash, courtesy
of Sultan Al-Aziz Uthman,
who embarked on a futile mission
to dismantle all the pyramids.
A second attempt was made in the
19th century by Colonel Howard
Vyse, who delicately made his
way through using gunpowder.
The smooth upper
limestone casing
was looted, leaving the
lower third of red granite
to show the true
age of the building.
Deep, rounded cavities
between the rocks
attest to thousands of years
of water exploiting the seams.
Then, for reasons unknown,
someone in recent times
recarved a square
section on each face,
stripping away the erosion
to reveal the stones
in their original condition.
Some feature the same enigmatic
knobs found in the Assyrian.
It is an unsolved
riddle, particularly
as this architectural detail is
found in the Andes, even Taiwan.
And what connects
all of them are
traditions of a group of
preflood builder gods answering
to the same physical
description, mannerisms,
and purpose as the
Akhu Shemsu Hor.
If so, these sages were
not unique to Egypt.
They had an international
maritime presence,
a point strongly implied
in the Edfu building texts.
One characteristic
of the interior
is the extensive use of
high-grade granite, particularly
the monoliths used for the
ceiling of the main chamber,
which are carved
as a barrel vault
to relieve nonexistent pressure
from the ceiling above,
because the chamber
sits inside the bedrock.
It is also a mystery as to
how the blocks were maneuvered
inside a confined space with
virtually no room for maneuver.
This particular granite is
composed of feldspar, quartz,
and mica, making it an
extremely hard material
to work with under
any circumstances.
But it's the high
content of mica
that is of interest, a
material generally used
as an electrical
insulator and capacitor.
Was Menkaure ever connected
with this pyramid?
A delicately carved blue
basalt box and its broken lid
were found empty.
In the adjacent chamber
lay bits of bones
and an anthropoid
wooden coffin, allegedly
bearing Menkaure's
name, but it turned out
to be a later
Christian invention.
While the true architect
remains elusive,
the pyramid does serve an
important geodetic function.
Stretch a chord
from the far corner
to the corner of the pyramid
attributed to Khufu, extended it
670 miles and you reach one of
the oldest monuments on Earth,
Portasar, better known by its
new Turkish name Gobekli Tepe.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Portasar is an Armenian
site whose name
means umbilical cord of Asar,
the Egyptian name of Osiris.
And like Osiris, Portasar
is associated with Orion,
marking as it does the first
rising of its belt stars.
And like Giza, the event
is dated to 10,450 BC.
Astronomy was the main
activity for thousands of years
in the nearby town of Haranu.
Its astronomers
were the Sabians,
named after the
Egyptian word for star.
Described as the people of
the book of the god of wisdom,
Djehuti, these white-robed
mystics were still undertaking
pilgrimage in the 14th century
BC to the Giza Plateau to honor
the source of their knowledge.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Next door stands
Khafre's pyramid.
The only connection between
the pyramid and the pharaoh
are the statues found buried in
the rubble of the Valley Temple
600 yards away.
Rumor has it that
the building began
to be stripped by
Rameses II for a temple
he commissioned for
himself in nearby Iwnw.
So if it was good
enough for him,
it was good enough for others
to continue the plunder.
The middle pyramid
appears bigger
due to its position
on higher ground
as well as the remaining casing
stones precariously balanced
around the summit.
It's a masterpiece
of engineering.
The bedrock at each corner was
shaved until perfectly level.
The center was then
carved into the steps
into which the foundation
blocks were locked.
It is earthquake proof
and aligned to true north.
Like the small pyramid,
the lower courses
were lined with granite.
Its chambers are carved
inside the bedrock,
once again making the gabled
ceiling in the main chamber
structurally redundant.
Unlike others, the
box in the chamber
is partially sunk
into the floor.
Made of solid granite,
it measures 8.5 feet
in length, ironically the
height of the Akhu Shemsu Hor
as described in Karnak.
And yet this entire
underground world
sits beneath the pyramid,
which itself only
begins above the bedrock, a
mountain of stone that has yet
to yield any hidden rooms.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
By contrast, the most explored
and speculated building
in the world is the pyramid
attributed to Khufu.
The Great Pyramid
is a scale model
of the northern hemisphere,
its measurements and analog
of the planet upon
which it stands.
Even the number of stones
around the perimeter
mark the cycle of Sirius.
It is a library of
geodetic information
designed for
posterity and capable
of surviving major disasters.
In 2017, it was still
revealing its secrets
when experiments
using muon radiography
uncovered evidence
of a large chamber.
Below this cavity lies
the Grand Gallery,
a steep 157-foot-long granite
hall with a corbelled ceiling
that recedes in seven steps.
Since the Grand
Gallery is set to be
tuned to the period of
rotation of the solar system
around the galaxy,
its measurements
were transcribed into
a set of frequencies
akin to a music scale.
When transposed to a
keyboard, the sonic effect
induces a kind of altered
state of awareness,
while each note
tangibly interacts
with various parts of the body.
Perhaps this is one
intended function.
Seen with an esoteric
eye, the Grand Gallery
and its connecting rooms
begin to make sense.
Beginning with the diagram
in Tuthmosis III chamber
in the Valley of the Kings.
The fourth hour from "The
Book of the Hidden Chamber"
describes, "The great one who is
in the Amduat moving to the land
of Rosetau, the
place of hauling.
The place of hauling is
an integral component
in the act of rejuvenation
and is illustrated
as a series of sloping passages
and doors resembling those
of the Grand Gallery, right
down to the megalithic granite
plugs that form its roof.
In ancient Egypt, rejuvenation
was a lunar concept.
And we see this represented by
the connecting Queen's Chamber,
a room made of limestone,
a material created
by the sedimentary action of
water, which, of course, comes
under the influence of the moon.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
Its complementary opposite
is the King's Chamber,
with its finely fitted
and polished granite
blocks, born of volcanic
action, representative
of the solar principle.
Like the human
heart, the chamber
is placed to the left of
the spine of the pyramid.
The nine blocks
forming the ceiling
reflect the esoteric
number of perfection.
The granite box is a
scaled-down version of the room.
All this makes for one
of the most fine-tuned,
resonant chambers on the planet,
where words are fragmented,
and sound becomes
the main currency.
Indeed, archaeoacoustic
experiments
revealed an average resonant
frequency of 110 hertz,
a frequency within a narrow
range that shifts activity
from the information processing
left hemisphere of the brain
to the right hemisphere
and its capacity
to induce sensing
and altered states.
The same frequency is produced
in chambers from Malta
to England and Ireland,
places with long traditions
of altered states and
associations with gods.
Could this austere
room be the place
where the seeker is transformed
into an ark, a being radiant
with inner illumination?
Certainly, it is one
location on Giza Plateau
where visions and out-of-body
states are experienced.
And viewed as a whole,
the passages linking
through the Great Pyramid
follow an allegorical journey
of elevation.
Beginning in the rough stone
chamber inside the bedrock,
the space and quality
improves as one ascends closer
to the chamber made of the
highest polished stone.
The building, it
seems, is a metaphor
of the initiate reshaped
from rough stone
into polished
diamond into a god.
Which leaves us with a
connection between the three
pyramids and the
belt stars of Orion.
Is it a mere visual
interpretation of the sky?
Or is there a deeper meaning?
The unlikely answer
comes from Easter Island,
where a tribe named Waitaha
lived there 12,000 years ago
and interacted with gods
answering to the same physical
description and doctrine
as the Akhu Shemsu Hor.
Or as they were known throughout
the Pacific, Urukehu and shining
ones.
Like their Egyptian
counterparts,
they, too, were
associated with Orion.
According to the three
wisdom houses of Waitaha,
each star is linked to a group
of gods and their qualities.
Star Mintaka represents the
leaders, thinkers, and planners.
Its mirror is the
Pyramid of Menkaure,
with its impression of people
engaged in mental activity.
Star Alnilam is for
investigators, researchers,
and builders.
Its mirror is the
Pyramid of Khafre
and its impressions
of practicality.
And star Alnitak, the knowledge
keepers, shamans, and dreamers,
its mirror is the
Pyramid of Khufu
with its unparalleled record
of shamanic experiences.
The Waitaha's unique
tradition finally
provides us with the purpose
behind each monument.
As to how the
buildings were used,
that recipe is lost to time.
But at a few who've
entered the King's Chamber
and left the body
for parts unknown,
the answer lies with something
called sympathetic resonance.
The Waitaha's direct interaction
with the followers of Horus
began in the same period when
these traveling seafaring
gods were establishing the eight
sacred mounds along the Nile.
And their experience is shared
by two other ancient peoples,
the Aymara of South
America and the Maya.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
It's been said that the sign
of an advanced civilization
lies in its ability
to communicate
multiple levels of information
through simple symbols.
The same can be said of the
monuments of ancient Egypt,
designed as they are as
multilayered conduits
of knowledge and function.
Speaking through them,
the Akhu Shemsu Hor
laid a foundation for a
rejuvenated, ideal world,
designed to last like
the soul into eternity.
The principle is conveyed in a
simple symbol, the union of a T,
the Tao, the breath of god
with the form of infinity,
the eternal breath of
creation, life everlasting.
And their vision is
a reminder that we
are an expression of that
breath, the very gods we've
been searching for.
[MUSIC PLAYING]